# hopland-hunting
Exploration of Hopland hunter GPS data for McInturff et al forthcoming

**Methods**

We successfully recovered data from 308 of the 324 hunter loggers. We discarded an additional 82 duplicate tracks where two or more hunters traveled together for the duration of the hunt, as based on visual inspection of the tracks, to avoid pseudoreplication. [Alex, should we add anything else here?] This resulted in the use of 226 tracks for analysis.

We clipped all tracks to the study area polygon (HREC boundary) to ensure we were capturing active hunting behavior, given that 8 hunters left the property briefly in the midday. We resampled all tracks to a fix rate of 3 minutes using the amt::track_resample() function. We believe this time scale is appropriate for fine-scale analysis of hunter decision-making and movement, and is also appropriate given GPS error and computational limitations. (Sensitivity analysis—can do models with 5 min, and/or 1 min, and see if our inferences differ meaningfully.) We then removed any point that was >1.2 km from the previous point, which corresponds to a movement speed of at least 15 mph given a 3 minute fix rate. This is the speed limit in the study area, and also corresponds to a speed threshold at which drivers can no longer be considered to be actively hunting (searching for deer). This cut-off removed clear outliers due to GPS error or locations where the hunters were leaving the property at higher speeds. This resulted in the removal of 174 of 55,843 points (0.3%), leaving 56,069 steps for analysis. We extracted spatial covariates at each point using the raster package in R.

To explore behavioral patterns of hunters, we used the moveHMM package to fit hidden Markov models to the hunter movement data. We assigned movement points to one of three behavioral states, as exploratory modeling suggested that three-state models performed better than two-state models (based on AIC), and best corresponded to our understanding of hunter behavior. The three states correspond to (1) resting or processing harvested deer, (2) moving on foot, and (3) moving by vehicle. We followed guidance from the moveHMM package authors when choosing initial parameter values (Michelot & Langrock 2019 - https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/moveHMM/vignettes/moveHMM-starting-values.pdf). To determine whether our models were sensitive to initial parameter choice, we ran 100 iterations of the null model with randomly-chosen starting parameters for step length mean, step length standard deviation, step length zero mass, and turning angle concentration. Our model converged on the same parameters for 77 of 100 of the iterations, and this model was the best-fitting (i.e., with the largest likelihood), indicating numerical stability. We then used the parameter values from the best model as our starting values for all subsequent modeling.

We developed a set of candidate models based on our hypotheses about the effects of landscape features on hunting behavior, and assessed models based on Aikaike Information Criterion (AIC). We scaled and centered all covariates prior to modeling. We first explored univariate models, and then used forward stepwise model selection to determine the best models. We did not include highly correlated covariates (|r| > 0.6) in the same model (there was high correlation between the three measures of ruggedness, and between grassland density and woodland density).

**Results**

State 1 corresponds to XX, State 2 corresponds to XX, and State 3 corresponds to XX.

We found that hunters spend X% of time in the stationary state, X% of time moving on foot, and X% of time searching by vehicle.
